=pod

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

language -- Safe, fast, and expressive general-purpose programming language

=head1 SYNOPSIS

To invoke the Codira REPL (Read-Eval-Print-Loop):

=over

B<language> repl

=back

To execute a Codira program:

=over

B<language> program.code <arguments>

=back

To work with the Codira Package Manager:

=over

B<language> build|package|run|test [options] <inputs>

=back

To invoke the Codira compiler:

=over

B<languagec> [options] <inputs>

=back

A list of supported options is available through the "-help" option:

=over

B<language> -help

B<language> build -help

B<languagec> -help

=back

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Codira is a general-purpose programming language built using a modern approach to
safety, performance, and software design patterns.

The goal of the Codira project is to create the best available language for uses
ranging from systems programming, to mobile and desktop apps, scaling up to
cloud services. Most importantly, Codira is designed to make writing and
maintaining I<correct> programs easier for the developer. To achieve this goal,
we believe that the most obvious way to write Codira code must also be:

B<Safe.> The most obvious way to write code should also behave in a safe manner.
Undefined behavior is the enemy of safety, and developer mistakes should be
caught before software is in production. Opting for safety sometimes means Codira
will feel strict, but we believe that clarity saves time in the long run.

B<Fast.> Codira is intended as a replacement for C-based languages (C, C++, and
Objective-C). As such, Codira must be comparable to those languages in
performance for most tasks. Performance must also be predictable and consistent,
not just fast in short bursts that require clean-up later. There are lots of
languages with novel features - being fast is rare.

B<Expressive.> Codira benefits from decades of advancement in computer science to
offer syntax that is a joy to use, with modern features developers expect. But
Codira is never done. We will monitor language advancements and embrace what
works, continually evolving to make Codira even better.

=head1 BUGS

Reporting bugs is a great way for anyone to help improve Codira. The issue
tracker for Codira, an open-source project, is located at
L<https://github.com/languagelang/language/issues>.

If a bug can be reproduced only within an Xcode project or a playground, or if
the bug is associated with an Apple NDA, please file a report to Apple's
Feedback Assistant at L<https://feedbackassistant.apple.com> instead.

=head1 SEE ALSO

=head2 HOME PAGE

L<https://language.org>

=head2 APPLE DEVELOPER RESOURCES

L<https://developer.apple.com/language/resources>

=head2 CODE REPOSITORIES

Codira Programming Language at L<https://github.com/languagelang/language>

Codira Package Manager at L<https://github.com/languagelang/language-package-manager>
